Add docs best effort responses (#3865)
dfinity/portal: docs/developer-docs/smart-contracts/advanced-features/async-code.mdx

---
keywords: [beginner, concept, async code, inter-canister calls, async inter-canister, async]
---

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# Inter-canister calls & async code

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Beginner", "Concept"]} />

## Overview

The ICP allows canisters to seamlessly interact with other canisters by calling their methods, just like external users call canisters. You are likely to need inter-canister calls early on: they are necessary to transfer the ICP token, or to access certain system functionality through the [management canister](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/advanced-features/management-canister). This remote procedure call (RPC) mechanism, based on a request-response paradigm, will feel familiar if you are coming from Ethereum or other smart-contract enabled blockchains, but there are also important differences that you should also understand:

> - On ICP, inter-canister calls are **asynchronous**. That means that while an inter-canister call is in progress other calls can still be processed. This significantly increases the canisters' scalability. However, it also means that canister authors have to correctly handle calls executing concurrently. In particular, this differs from the transactional nature of Ethereum's smart contract calls.

Author: Reworded to cover your first point.

You're also right that heartbeats can be executed concurrently, but I'd rather leave it out here since here this is meant to be an intro document (I wouldn't expect the users to know about heartbeats/timers yet)

> - Since the calls are asynchronous, they are based on **callbacks**: when issuing a request to the callee canister, the caller also specifies a callback that will handle the callee's response. Many programming languages provide syntactic sugar for handling asynchronous calls in the form of `async/await` syntax, which obviates the need for explicit callbacks and allows structuring asynchronous code similar to an ordinary synchronous function. Motoko, the Rust Canister Development Kit (CDK), Azle (Typescript CDK) and Kybra (Python CDK) all support such syntactic sugar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Since the calls are asynchronous, they are based on **callbacks**: When issuing a request to the callee canister, the caller also specifies a callback that will handle the callee's response. Many programming languages provide syntactic sugar for handling asynchronous calls in the form of `async/await` syntax, which obviates the need for explicit callbacks and allows structuring asynchronous code similar to an ordinary synchronous function. Motoko, the Rust Canister Development Kit (CDK), Azle (Typescript CDK) and Kybra (Python CDK) all support such syntactic sugar.
```

The `async/await` pattern makes this look straightforward, as the developer can write code as if processing happens sequentially and the call to
the callee is handled “synchronously”. However, given ICP's message passing model, one has to be careful in case there are [concurrent calls that
message executions can interleave](/docs/current/references/message-execution-properties) as these can lead to inconsistencies if they are not anticipated.
- Since the calls are asynchronous, they are based on **callbacks**: when issuing a request to the callee canister, the caller also specifies a callback that will handle the callee's response. Many programming languages provide syntactic sugar for handling asynchronous calls in the form of `async/await` syntax, which obviates the need for explicit callbacks and allows structuring asynchronous code similar to an ordinary synchronous function. Motoko, the Rust Canister Development Kit (CDK), Azle (Typescript CDK) and Kybra (Python CDK) all support such syntactic sugar.

> ## Overview of language runtime for asynchronous code

Author: I have pushed the change, I see below:
> but in this mode the "true" response is not guaranteed to be delivered, and can be masked by a system generated error response instead.

Not sure what's going on 🤷

> Before you can call other canisters that are not part of your project, you need to learn the available endpoints (methods) that you can call, as well as their arguments and return values. Candid serves both as a data format and as an interface description language, and the ICP SDK will by default bundle the interface description (if available) in the `candid:service` metadata section of the canister code. For example, you can examine the interface of the ICP ledger canister (whose principal is `ryjl3-tyaaa-aaaaa-aaaba-cai`) using [`dfx`](/docs/current/developer-docs/getting-started/install).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can call other canisters that are not part of your project, you need to learn the available endpoints (methods) that you can call, as well as their arguments and return values. Candid serves both as a data format and an interface description language. The IC SDK will by default bundle the interface description (if available) in the `candid:service` metadata section of the canister code. For example, you can examine the interface of the ICP ledger canister (whose principal is `ryjl3-tyaaa-aaaaa-aaaba-cai`) using [`dfx`](/docs/current/developer-docs/getting-started/install).
```

If you are using Candid, you should also write or generate service description files for your own canisters so that other canisters and external applications can easily call into your canister. See the [Candid documentation](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/candid/candid-howto) for more instructions.

When the canister authors support it, remote canisters can also be made "pullable", such that you can easily test against the canisters locally. See the [dfx documentation](/docs/current/developer-docs/developer-tools/cli-tools/dfx-json#pullable-canisters) for more details.

## Performing inter-canister calls

Once you know the endpoints you want to call, in most cases you will want to use the CDK of your language to perform the calls. The CDK will generally take care of Candid encoding and decoding, and provide an `async/await` based syntax for your inter-canister calls. Refer to the language documentation

> ([Motoko](/docs/current/motoko/main/writing-motoko/intercanister-calls), [Rust](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/rust/intercanister),  [Typescript](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/typescript/), [Python](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/python/))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
([Motoko](/docs/current/motoko/main/writing-motoko/intercanister-calls), [Rust](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/rust/intercanister), [Typescript](https://demergent-labs.github.io/azle/), [Python](https://demergent-labs.github.io/kybra/))
```

for more details.

### Low-level API

> Under the hood, the CDKs use the low-level Wasm API to perform inter-canister calls, relying on callbacks. Most users will not need to interact with this API directly, but you can find more details in the [Internet Computer interface specification](/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#system-api-call) if you need to perform workflows or use functionality that might not be directly exposed by your CDK, or if you intend to implement a CDK yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under the hood, the CDKs use the low-level Wasm API to perform inter-canister calls while relying on callbacks. Most users will not need to interact with this API directly, but you can find more details in the [Internet Computer interface specification](/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#system-api-call) if you need to perform workflows or use functionality that might not be directly exposed by your CDK or if you intend to implement a CDK yourself.
```

### Attaching cycles

> [Cycles](/docs/current/developer-docs/gas-cost) are the currency in which canisters pay for their resource usage. Canisters can send some of the cycles they hold to other canisters. This can be done either by directly attaching cycles to any call to the target canister through the [`deposit_cycles`](/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#ic-deposit_cycles) method of the management canister. The target canister must explicitly accept part or all of the sent cycles; the remainder is refunded to the caller.

Author: Yes - I see that isn't very clear, I'll change.

> Some endpoints require the caller to attach cycles to the call. For example, the [on-chain signature](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/signatures/signing-messages-t-ecdsa) operations of the management canister require cycles to be attached. Requiring cycles can be used to implement a "direct gas" model, as opposed to the default ["reverse gas"](/docs/current/developer-docs/gas-cost) model of ICP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some endpoints require the caller to attach cycles to the call. For example, the [onchain signature](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/signatures/signing-messages-t-ecdsa) operations of the management canister require cycles to be attached. Requiring cycles can be used to implement a "direct gas" model, as opposed to the default ["reverse gas"](/docs/current/developer-docs/gas-cost) model of ICP.
```

Refer to the language documentation ([Motoko](/docs/current/motoko/main/writing-motoko/intercanister-calls), [Rust](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/rust/intercanister),  [Typescript](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/typescript/), [Python](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/python/)) for details on how to send and accept cycles.

## Guaranteed response vs best-effort response calls

ICP supports two kind of inter-canister calls:

> * Guaranteed response calls provide the caller with the guarantee that, if the callee produces a response (which may be unsuccessful, i.e., an error during call processing), that exact response will be delivered to the caller. Furthermore, if the request isn't successfully delivered to the callee (which can happen during high load, callee running out of cycles, and other reasons), the response will notify the caller of this.

Reviewer 2: +1

The other way I think of it (and I've mentioned this in an earlier comment) is that guaranteed response calls are closed loops: the request goes out (potentially all the way to the callee, potentially not very far); one response is produced from it (whether by the callee or by the system); that response is always returned to the caller (whether this takes until the heat death of the universe or just before).

> * Guaranteed response calls provide the caller with the guarantee that, if the callee produces a response (which may be unsuccessful, i.e., an error during call processing), that exact response will be delivered to the caller. Furthermore, if the request isn't successfully delivered to the callee (which can happen during high load, callee running out of cycles, and other reasons), the response will notify the caller of this.

Author: Changed the wording here, I think it aligns with what you saying more now

> * Guaranteed response calls provide the caller with the guarantee that, if the callee produces a response (which may be unsuccessful, i.e., an error during call processing), that exact response will be delivered to the caller. Furthermore, if the request isn't successfully delivered to the callee (which can happen during high load, callee running out of cycles, and other reasons), the response will notify the caller of this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Guaranteed response calls provide the caller with the guarantee that if the callee produces a response (which may be unsuccessful, i.e., an error during call processing), that exact response will be delivered to the caller. Furthermore, if the request isn't successfully delivered to the callee (which can happen during high load, callee running out of cycles, and other reasons), the response will notify the caller of this.
```

Guaranteed response calls are a legacy call mechanism. While on the surface they make it easier to write correct applications, they also suffer some significant drawbacks:

* If the callee is unresponsive (which could happen because of high load on the callee, high load or an error on the callee's subnet, or even because the callee is malicious and delays the response on purpose), the caller canister is stalled and has no control over when it can resume processing or provide an answer. Furthermore, the caller canister cannot be safely stopped and upgraded.
* They do not scale well. When the system is under high load, canisters may be unable to issue further inter-canister calls.

Best-effort calls address both of these problems. However, they can require more effort on the part of the caller to handle the additional error case. Here are some guidelines how to choose between the two types of calls:

* Always prefer best-effort response calls for calls that don't change the state of the callee, i.e., reads.

> * For endpoints that change the state of the callee, the best practice is to make such endpoints amenable to [safe retries](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/best-practices/idempotency), since this is also required for safely handling external user calls. Use best-effort responses calls for such endpoints, and handle the additional edge cases.

Author: I reworded this now more thoroughly to make it clear that we recommend doing that for ingress messages anyways.

> * Use guaranteed response calls for endpoints that mutate state and do not enable safe retries, or calls that perform larger cycle transfers. Best-effort response calls can currently lose cycles in edge cases. Be aware of the limitations of guaranteed response calls listed above. If safe upgrades are needed, consider using a stateless proxy canister (see the [security best practices](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/security/security-best-practices/inter-canister-calls) for more information).

Reviewer 3: Here I would not say that best effort calls can lose cycles in edge cases as it makes it sound as if it was a bug in the system. I'd rather use the formulation that if a message is dropped also the attached cycles will be dropped.

Author: Good idea, changed.

## `async/await` syntax, concurrency and state changes

> The ``async/await`` syntax allows canister methods to issue asynchronous inter-canister calls and still be structured like an ordinary synchronous function. In this syntax, a method `foo` on a canister `A` could be written something like (in Rust-like syntax):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``async/await`` syntax allows canister methods to issue asynchronous inter-canister calls and still be structured like an ordinary synchronous function. In this syntax, a method `foo` on a canister `A` could be written something like this: (in a Rust-like syntax):
```

```
async fn foo() {
  do_work();
  call(canister_b, 'bar').await;
  do_more_work(res);
}
```

While this looks like an ordinary function, there are important differences in behavior between synchronous functions and functions that perform inter-canister calls.

> As already mentioned, unlike, say, Ethereum, multiple method call executions on the same canister can be executed concurrently in the presence of inter-canister calls. This increases the canister's throughput, but it also means that the code needs to be correct also in the presence of concurrent behaviors. In particular, the developers have to ensure that no re-entrancy issues occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple method call executions on the same canister can be executed concurrently in the presence of inter-canister calls. This increases the canister's throughput, but it also means that the code needs to be correct also in the presence of concurrent behaviors. In particular, the developers have to ensure that no re-entrancy issues occur.
```

Author: Reworded; I want to keep some reference to Ethereum.

> Furthermore, canister methods that use inter-canister calls are **not atomic**. A failure somewhere in the method might not roll back all the changes that the method performed. Under the hood, such methods use the (low-level Wasm API)[### Low-level API] calls, and are translated into multiple *message handler Wasm functions*: an initial handler function that handles the method call itself (corresponding to `do_work` above), and other handler functions that serve as callbacks to handle the responses for any inter-canister calls that have been issued (`do_more_work` in the example above). The execution of each message handler is atomic on its own; an error (more precisely, a Wasm trap) rolls back only the changes performed by the current message handler, but does not affect the changes made by the other handlers.

Reviewer 3: `(low-level Wasm API)[### Low-level API]` this link is broken in the rendering

Author: Fixed

> Furthermore, canister methods that use inter-canister calls are **not atomic**. A failure somewhere in the method might not roll back all the changes that the method performed. Under the hood, such methods use the [low-level Wasm API](### Low-level API) calls, and are translated into multiple *message handler Wasm functions*: an initial handler function that handles the method call itself (corresponding to `do_work` above), and other handler functions that serve as callbacks to handle the responses for any inter-canister calls that have been issued (`do_more_work` in the example above). The execution of each message handler is atomic on its own; an error (more precisely, a Wasm trap) rolls back only the changes performed by the current message handler, but does not affect the changes made by the other handlers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, canister methods that use inter-canister calls are **not atomic**. A failure somewhere in the method might not roll back all the changes that the method performed. Under the hood, such methods use the low-level Wasm API calls, and are translated into multiple *message handler Wasm functions*: An initial handler function that handles the method call itself (corresponding to `do_work` above), and other handler functions that serve as callbacks to handle the responses for any inter-canister calls that have been issued (`do_more_work` in the example above). The execution of each message handler is atomic on its own; an error (more precisely, a Wasm trap) rolls back only the changes performed by the current message handler, but does not affect the changes made by the other handlers.
```

> For these reasons, to write correct code in the presence of inter-canister calls you should understand how the CDK for your language of choice desugars the `async/await` syntax into Wasm code, and in particular where the message handler boundaries are, as these are both "commit points" for state changes and potential interleaving points for concurrent executions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For these reasons, you should understand how the CDK for your language of choice desugars the `async/await` syntax into Wasm code to write correct code in the presence of inter-canister calls. In particular, where the message handler boundaries are, these are both "commit points" for state changes and potential interleaving points for concurrent executions.
```

> A [separate document](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/message-execution-properties) contains more details on interleaving/commit points and message execution properties. Refer to the [security best practices](/docs/current/developer-docs/security/security-best-practices/inter-canister-calls) for advice on how to handle concurrency and state rollback issues correctly. Finally, refer to the CDK documentation for your language to learn more about desugaring of `async/await` and interleaving/commit points.

Reviewer 3: Should we also point to the security best practices for best-effort responses?

Author: We have a single security best practices doc for all types of inter-canister calls (as most points are shared between both call types), and we already link to it above.

---
keywords: [beginner, concept, async code, inter-canister calls, async inter-canister, async]
---

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# Inter-canister calls & async code

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Beginner", "Concept"]} />

> The ICP allows canisters to seamlessly interact with other canisters by calling their methods, just like external users call canisters. You are likely to need inter-canister calls early on: they are necessary to transfer the ICP token, or to access certain system functionality through the [management canister](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/advanced-features/management-canister). This remote procedure call (RPC) mechanism, based on a request-response paradigm, will feel familiar if you are coming from Ethereum or other smart-contract enabled blockchains, but there are also important differences that you should understand:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ICP allows canisters to seamlessly interact with other canisters by calling their methods, just like external users call canisters. They are necessary for operations such as transferring tokens or accessing certain system functionality through the [management canister](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/advanced-features/management-canister). 

This remote procedure call (RPC) mechanism, based on a request-response paradigm, will feel familiar if you are coming from Ethereum or other smart contract enabled blockchains, but there are also important differences that you should understand:
```

> - On ICP, inter-canister calls are **asynchronous**. That means that when a canister `C1` calls a canister `C2`, `C1` can process other calls while waiting on the response from `C2`. This significantly increases the canisters' scalability. However, it also means that canister authors have to correctly handle calls executing concurrently. In particular, this differs from the transactional nature of Ethereum's smart contract calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- On ICP, inter-canister calls are **asynchronous**. When a canister `C1` calls a canister `C2`, `C1` can process other calls while waiting on the response from `C2`. This significantly increases the canisters' scalability. However, it also means that canister authors have to correctly handle calls executing concurrently. In particular, this differs from the transactional nature of Ethereum's smart contract calls.
```

> - Since the calls are asynchronous, they are based on **callbacks**: When issuing a request to the callee canister, the caller also specifies a callback that will handle the callee's response. Many programming languages provide syntactic sugar for handling asynchronous calls in the form of `async/await` syntax, which obviates the need for explicit callbacks and allows structuring asynchronous code similar to an ordinary synchronous function. Motoko, the Rust Canister Development Kit (CDK), Azle (Typescript CDK) and Kybra (Python CDK) all support such syntactic sugar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Since the calls are asynchronous, they are based on **callbacks**. When issuing a request to the callee canister, the caller also specifies a callback that will handle the callee's response. Many programming languages provide syntactic sugar for handling asynchronous calls in the form of `async/await` syntax, which obviates the need for explicit callbacks and allows structuring asynchronous code similar to an ordinary synchronous function. Motoko, the Rust Canister Development Kit (CDK), Azle (Typescript CDK) and Kybra (Python CDK) all support such syntactic sugar.
```

> - The requests are not guaranteed to be delivered. This allows the system to use its resources more optimally overall, but again differs from Ethereum and many other blockchains, and needs to be handled correctly. Moreover, calls can be made in either **bounded-wait** or **unbounded-wait** modes. The former is better suited for a wider range of trust assumptions, supports a higher volume of messages and is much more resilient under high system load, but in this mode the "true" response is not guaranteed to be delivered, and can be masked by a system generated error response instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The requests are not guaranteed to be delivered. This allows the system to use its resources more optimally overall, but again differs from other blockchains and needs to be handled correctly. Moreover, calls can be made in either **bounded-wait** or **unbounded-wait** modes. The former is better suited for a wider range of trust assumptions, supports a higher volume of messages and is much more resilient under high system load, but in this mode the "true" response is not guaranteed to be delivered and can be masked by a system generated error response instead.
```

Author: Leaving the original because it doesn't differ from all other blockchains, but just some (of which Ethereum is the most important example)

> - ICP canisters can be written in any language that compiles down to Wasm. That means that the caller and callee canisters can be written in different languages, and need some common data format to exchange messages. While the ICP doesn't enforce a data format, [Candid](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/candid/candid-concepts) is the de facto standard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ICP canisters can be written in any language that compiles into Wasm. The caller and callee canisters can be written in different languages and need some common data format to exchange messages. While the ICP doesn't enforce a data format, [Candid](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/candid/candid-concepts) is the de facto standard.
```

When the canister authors support it, remote canisters can also be made "pullable", such that you can easily test against the canisters locally. See the [dfx documentation](/docs/current/developer-docs/developer-tools/cli-tools/dfx-json#pullable-canisters) for more details.

## Performing inter-canister calls

Once you know the endpoints you want to call, in most cases you will want to use the CDK of your language to perform the calls. The CDK will generally take care of Candid encoding and decoding, and provide an `async/await` based syntax for your inter-canister calls. Refer to the language documentation
([Motoko](/docs/current/motoko/main/writing-motoko/intercanister-calls), [Rust](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/rust/intercanister), [Typescript](https://demergent-labs.github.io/azle/), [Python](https://demergent-labs.github.io/kybra/))
for more details.

### Low-level API

> Under the hood, the CDKs use the low-level Wasm API to perform inter-canister calls, and set appropriate callbacks to handle responses. Most users will not need to interact with this API directly, but you can find more details in the [Internet Computer interface specification](/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#system-api-call) if you need to perform workflows or use functionality that might not be directly exposed by your CDK or if you intend to implement a CDK yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under the hood, the CDKs use the low-level Wasm API to perform inter-canister calls and set appropriate callbacks to handle responses. Most users will not need to interact with this API directly, but you can find more details in the [Internet Computer interface specification](/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#system-api-call) if you need to perform workflows or use functionality that might not be directly exposed by your CDK or if you intend to implement a CDK yourself.
```

### Attaching cycles

> [Cycles](/docs/current/developer-docs/gas-cost) are the currency in which canisters pay for their resource usage. Canisters can send some of the cycles they hold to other canisters. This can be done either by directly attaching cycles to any call to the target canister, or by calling the dedicated [`deposit_cycles`](/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#ic-deposit_cycles) method of the management canister and attaching the cycles there. In the former way of attaching cycles, not using `deposit_cycles`), the target canister must explicitly accept part or all of the sent cycles when processing the call; the remainder is refunded to the caller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Cycles](/docs/current/developer-docs/gas-cost) are the currency in which canisters pay for their resource usage. Canisters can send some of the cycles they hold to other canisters. This can be done either by directly attaching cycles to any call to the target canister, or by calling the dedicated [`deposit_cycles`](/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#ic-deposit_cycles) method of the management canister and attaching the cycles there. In the former way of attaching cycles (not using `deposit_cycles`), the target canister must explicitly accept part or all of the sent cycles when processing the call; the remainder is refunded to the caller.
```

:::info
Note that cycles may get dropped when using bounded-wait calls. See the section on [bounded- vs unbounded-wait calls](#ic-call-types) for more details.
:::

> Some endpoints require the caller to attach cycles to the call. For example, the [onchain signature](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/signatures/signing-messages-t-ecdsa) operations of the management canister require cycles to be attached. Requiring cycles can be used to implement a "direct gas" model, as opposed to the default ["reverse gas"](/docs/current/developer-docs/gas-cost) model of ICP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some endpoints require the caller to attach cycles to the call. For example, the [threshold signature](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/signatures/signing-messages-t-ecdsa) operations of the management canister require cycles to be attached. Requiring cycles can be used to implement a "direct gas" model, as opposed to the default ["reverse gas"](/docs/current/developer-docs/gas-cost) model of ICP.
```

Refer to the language documentation ([Motoko](/docs/current/motoko/main/writing-motoko/intercanister-calls), [Rust](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/rust/intercanister),  [Typescript](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/typescript/), [Python](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/python/)) for details on how to send and accept cycles.

## Bounded- vs unbounded-wait calls {#ic-call-types}

ICP supports two kinds of inter-canister calls:

> * Unbounded wait calls instruct the system to wait for as long as it takes to get a response to a call. The response might still be a failure, either because the request didn't get delivered to the callee, or because the callee rejected the request or produced an error while processing it. The unbounded wait provides the caller with the guarantee that it will learn the exact response to the call, which is why we also sometimes refer to these calls as *guaranteed response calls*. If the callee produces a response (which may be unsuccessful, i.e., an error during call processing), that exact response will be delivered to the caller. Furthermore, if the request isn't successfully delivered to the callee (which can happen during high load, callee running out of cycles, and other reasons), the response will notify the caller of this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Unbounded wait calls instruct the system to wait for as long as it takes to get a response to a call. The response might still be a failure, either because the request didn't get delivered to the callee or because the callee rejected the request or produced an error while processing it. The unbounded wait provides the caller with the guarantee that it will learn the exact response to the call, which is why we also sometimes refer to these calls as *guaranteed response calls*. If the callee produces a response (which may be unsuccessful, i.e., an error during call processing), that exact response will be delivered to the caller. Furthermore, if the request isn't successfully delivered to the callee (which can happen during high load, callee running out of cycles, and other reasons), the response will notify the caller of this.
```

> * Bounded-wait calls do not wait forever, and may return just return an "unknown" error response after some time. They allow the caller to specify a timeout (which is capped from above by the system to some maximum value, such as 5 minutes), after which the system will stop waiting. This is why we also refer to these calls as *best-effort response calls*. When the system stops waiting for a response, the request may or may not have been processed by the callee; the system is free to drop the request, but it may also deliver it to the target, and simply drop the produced response later. The caller must, if necessary, determine whether the call took place or not by some other mechanism. Any cycles associated with a dropped message (request or response) disappear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Bounded-wait calls do not wait forever and may return an "unknown" error response after some time. They allow the caller to specify a timeout (which is capped from above by the system to some maximum value (such as 5 minutes), after which the system will stop waiting. This is why we also refer to these calls as *best-effort response calls*. When the system stops waiting for a response, the request may or may not have been processed by the callee. The system is free to drop the request, but it may also deliver it to the target, and simply drop the produced response later. The caller must, if necessary, determine whether the call took place or not by some other mechanism. Any cycles associated with a dropped message (request or response) disappear.
```

While unbounded-wait calls require the caller to handle one error condition (unknown call status) less, bounded-wait calls also have significant advantages:

* If the callee is unresponsive (which could happen because of high load on the callee, high load or an outage on the callee's subnet, or even because the callee is malicious and delays the response on purpose), a caller that made an unbounded-wait call stalls and has no control over when it can resume processing or provide an answer. The callee that keeps processing the request forever forces the caller to also wait forever for a response. As safe upgrades require stopping the canister and waiting for all outstanding calls to return, canisters that issue unbounded-wait calls may be prevented from safely upgrading, potentially forever.

> * Bounded-wait calls scale much better. When the system is under high load, canisters are much more likely to still be able to issue bounded-wait calls than unbounded-wait calals.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Bounded-wait calls scale much better. When the system is under high load, canisters are much more likely to still be able to issue bounded-wait calls than unbounded-wait calls.
```

Best-effort calls address both of these problems. However, they can require more effort on the part of the caller to handle the additional error case. Here are some guidelines how to choose between the two types of calls:

> * Always prefer best-effort response calls for calls that don't change the state of the callee, i.e., reads.

Author: You can always mark a read as a query (though you don't have to)

## `async/await` syntax, concurrency and state changes

The ``async/await`` syntax allows canister methods to issue asynchronous inter-canister calls and still be structured like an ordinary synchronous function. In this syntax, a method `foo` on a canister `A` could be written something like this: (in a Rust-like syntax):

```
async fn foo() {
  do_work();
  call(canister_b, 'bar').await;
  do_more_work(res);
}
```

While this looks like an ordinary function, there are important differences in behavior between synchronous functions and functions that perform inter-canister calls.

First, unlike a synchronous function (used on, say Ethereum), multiple method call executions on the same canister can be executed concurrently in the presence of inter-canister calls. This increases the canister's throughput, but it also means that the code needs to be correct also in the presence of concurrent behaviors. In particular, the developers have to ensure that no re-entrancy issues occur.

> Second, canister methods that use inter-canister calls are **not atomic**. A failure somewhere in the method might not roll back all the changes that the method performed. Under the hood, such methods use the [low-level Wasm API](#low-level-api) calls, and are translated into multiple *message handler Wasm functions*: An initial handler function that handles the method call itself (corresponding to `do_work` above), and other handler functions that serve as callbacks to handle the responses for any inter-canister calls that have been issued (`do_more_work` in the example above). The execution of each message handler is atomic on its own; an error (more precisely, a Wasm trap) rolls back only the changes performed by the current message handler, but does not affect the changes made by the other handlers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second, canister methods that use inter-canister calls are **not atomic**. A failure somewhere in the method might not roll back all the changes that the method performed. Under the hood, such methods use the [low-level Wasm API](#low-level-api) calls and are translated into multiple *message handler Wasm functions*. An initial handler function that handles the method call itself (corresponding to `do_work` above), and other handler functions that serve as callbacks to handle the responses for any inter-canister calls that have been issued (`do_more_work` in the example above). The execution of each message handler is atomic on its own; an error (more precisely, a Wasm trap) rolls back only the changes performed by the current message handler, but does not affect the changes made by the other handlers.
```
